blog post: nf-core/fastquorum first release (#2552)
nf-core/website: src/content/blog/2024/fastquorum_intro.mdx

---
title: 'nf-core/fastquorum introduce'
subtitle: 'The nf-core fgbio Best Practices FASTQ to Consensus Pipeline'

> pubDate: 2024-04-25T00:19:00+01:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2024-05-27T00:19:00+01:00
```

Or form a quorum, if you will.

        <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2014.170"><Image src={duplex_sequencing_schema} alt="Duplex Sequencing Schema from Kennedy et al 2014" height="300" /></a>

Molecular barcodes can be added at various points in the library preparation process, including prior to or during amplification, for a single strand or to both strands of a double-stranded duplex molecule
In particular, [Duplex Sequencing][duplex-sequencing-link] can be used to identify reads from both strands of a double-stranded source molecule, squashing strand-specific errors that can occur during library preparation (e.g. PCR errors, oxidative damage due to hybrid capture).

This means UMIs can be found in the index/sample-barcoding reads (i7/i5 reads in Illumina parlance), or inline in the genomic/template reads themselves (R1/R2). Furthermore, there sometimes exists extra “spacer” sequence which should be removed prior to alignment and downstream analysis.

        <Image src={explaining_umis} alt="Always Sunny in Philadelphia conspiracy meme with caption 'Explaining where UMI bases are found'" height="300" />

> We utilize a [Read Structure][read-structure-link] to describe how the bases in a sequencing run should be allocated into logical reads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Read Structures][read-structure-link] are used to describe how the bases in a sequencing run should be allocated into logical reads.
```

It serves a similar purpose to the `--use-bases-mask` in Illumina's `bcltofastq` software, but provides some additional capabilities.
A few examples from the [fgbio wiki][read-structure-examples-link] are shown below:

1. A simple 2x150bp paired end run with no sample or molecular indices:

-   `150T150T`
-   `[+T, +T]`

2. A 2x75bp paired end run with an 8bp I1 index read:

-   `75T8B75T`
-   `[+T, 8B, +T]`

3. A 2x150bp paired end run with an 8bp I1 index read and an inline 6bp UMI in read 1:

-   `8M142T8B150T`
-   `[8M+T, 8B, +T]`

4. A 2x150bp duplex sequencing run with dual sample-barcoding (I1 and I2) and both a 10bp UMI and 5bp monotemplate at the start of both R1 and R2:

-   `10M5S135T8B8B10M5S135T`
-   `[10M5S+T, 8B, 8B, 10M5S+T]`

By utilizing the [fgbio toolkit][fgbio-homepage-link] and the [Read Structure][read-structure-link] description, [nf-core/fastquorum][nf-core-fastquorum-link] is able to support the diversity of molecular barcoding schemes.
A few of commercially available are described below:

> | Verified | Assay                                                     | Company                     | Strand | Randomness | URL                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: Is it correct that all the kits are not verified? Otherwise seems like an unnecessary column and could just a caveat in italics below the table

# fgbio: the Fulcrum Genomics Bioinformatics toolkit

That brings us to [fgbio][fgbio-github-link].

Like popular Bioinformatic toolkits like samtools, the `GATK`, and `bedtools`, `fgbio` is a collection of command line tools to analyze primary Genomics data developed by [Fulcrum Genomics][fulcrum-genomics-link].
Since its conception in 2015, `fgbio` has been downloaded from [Bioconda][fgbio-bioconda-link] over three-hundred thousand times, and we use it extensively with our clients at [Fulcrum Genomics][fulcrum-genomics-link].
It’s been downloaded mostly by us, but hopefully a few of you have too.

        <Image src={bioconda_download} alt="Chart of Bioconda downloads placing fgbio with three-hundred-thousand downloads" height="300" />

        <Image src={big_deal} alt="Will Ferrell in Anchorman meme with caption '>300K downloads on BioConda, we are kind of a big deal'" height="300" />

> The [fgbio toolkit has a wide variety of available tools][fgbio-list-of-tools-link], but particularly relevant for the [`nf-core/fastquorum`][nf-core-fastquorum-link] pipeline are the tools for working with read-level data containing these unique molecular indexes.

Reviewer 2: Could maybe give 2-3 extra examples of what other diverse things the fgbio tookit has/does (at least as a reader I would be curious, to see if it's worth it before clicking the link for the whole thing)

# Pipeline Overview

To support the various molecular barcoding schemes, [`nf-core/fastquorum`][nf-core-fastquorum-link] is organized into two main phases, according to the fgbio best practices: grouping and consensus calling. The pipeline steps for each phase can be best explained with a metro map 🚇:

        <Image src={fastquorum_diagram} alt="Subway diagram of the fastquorum pipeline" height="300" />

> Thank-you [James Fellows Yates][james-fellows-yates-link] for these diagrams!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thank you to [James Fellows Yates][james-fellows-yates-link] for these diagrams!
```

# Phase 1: Pre-processing and Grouping

The first phase takes FASTQs as input, and performs the following steps:

1. Performs basic Quality Control (with [`FASTQC`][fastqc-link]).
2. Extracts the UMI bases based on the molecular barcoding scheme (with [`fgbio FastqToBam`][fgbio-fastqtobam-link]).
3. Aligns the raw reads to the genome (with [`bwa`][bwa-link], [`samtools`][samtools-link], and [`fgbio ZipperBams`][fgbio-zipperbams-link]).
4. Then groups them by genomics coordinate and UMI (with [`fgbio GroupReadsByUmi`][fgbio-groupreadsbyumi-link]).

This produces the grouped BAM file, where raw reads originating from the same original source molecule are grouped together and tagged.

# Phase 2: Consensus Calling

The second phase takes the grouped BAM from phase one, and performs the following steps:

> 1. For each group of raw reads and calls a consensus sequence, thereby eliminating random errors, significantly improving the accuracy of resulting data. [`fgbio CallMolecularConsensusReads`][fgbio-callmolecularconsensusreads-link] is used for single-strand UMI schemes, while [`fgbio CallDuplexConsensusReads`][fgbio-callduplexconsensusreads-link] is used for duplex sequencing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. For each group of raw reads and calls a consensus sequence, thereby eliminating random errors, significantly improving the accuracy of resulting data. 
    - [`fgbio CallMolecularConsensusReads`][fgbio-callmolecularconsensusreads-link] is used for single-strand UMI schemes, while [`fgbio CallDuplexConsensusReads`][fgbio-callduplexconsensusreads-link] is used for duplex sequencing.
```

Both [Fulcrum Genomics][fulcrum-genomics-link] and its [current and past team members][fulcrum-genomics-about-link], along with the nf-core community of maintainers, core team, and contributors have enabled [`nf-core/fastquorum`][nf-core-fastquorum-link]'s first release.

| Fulcrum Genomics | TwinStrand Biosciences | `nf-core` Community |
| ---------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------- |
| Nils Homer       | Michael Hipp           | Simon Pearce        |
| Tim Fennell      | John McGuigan          | Adam Talbot         |
| Clint Valentine  | Thomas Smith           | Chad Young          |
| Yossi Farjoun    | Robert N. Azad         | Peter Hickey        |
| Jay Carey        |                        | Brad Langhorst      |
| Kari Stromhaug   |                        | Jordi Camps         |
| Nathan Roach     |                        | Brent Pedersen      |

If you want to hear this all over again, please check out the recent talk announcing the first release of this pipeline at the Nextflow Summit in Boston (2024):

>     <YouTube id="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qW4kgr3x9Mo" poster='https://img.youtube.com/vi/qW4kgr3x9Mo/maxresdefault.jpg'/> <YouTube id="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qW4kgr3x9Mo" poster='https://img.youtube.com/vi/qW4kgr3x9Mo/maxresdefault.jpg' />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <YouTube id="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qW4kgr3x9Mo" poster='https://img.youtube.com/vi/qW4kgr3x9Mo/maxresdefault.jpg'/>
```

Reviewer 3: That was the main issue for me.
Thanks @jfy133

-   Miscellaneous tools:
    -   Pick molecular indices (ex. sample barcodes, or molecular indexes): [`PickIlluminaIndices`][fgbio-pickilluminaindices-link] and [`PickLongIndices`][fgbio-picklongindices-link].
    -   Find technical/synthetic, or switch-back sequences in read-level data: [`FindTechnicalReads`][fgbio-findtechnicalreads-link] and [`FindSwitchbackReads`][fgbio-findswitchbackreads-link].
    -   Make synthetic mixture VCFs: [`MakeMixtureVcf`][fgbio-makemixturevcf-link] and [`MakeTwoSampleMixtureVcf`][fgbio-maketwosamplemixturevcf-link].

# Pipeline Overview

To support the various molecular barcoding schemes, [`nf-core/fastquorum`][nf-core-fastquorum-link] is organized into two main phases, according to the fgbio best practices: grouping and consensus calling. The pipeline steps for each phase can be best explained with a metro map 🚇:

>         <Image class="d-block m-auto" src={fastquorum_diagram} alt="Subway diagram of the fastquorum pipeline" width="600" />

Author: ```suggestion
        <Image class="d-block m-auto" src={fastquorum_diagram} alt="Subway diagram of the fastquorum pipeline" width="800" />
```

---
title: 'nf-core/fastquorum introduce'
subtitle: 'The nf-core fgbio Best Practices FASTQ to Consensus Pipeline'

> pubDate: 2024-05-27T00:19:00+01:00

Reviewer 2: Should be bumped now

    - 'bioinformatics'
    - 'genomics'
    - 'fgbio'
    - 'fastquorum'
---

import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

import but_why from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/but_why.gif';
import i_want_the_truth from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/i_want_the_truth.gif';
import darwin from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/darwin.png';
import duplex_sequencing_schema from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/duplex_sequencing_schema.png';
import explaining_umis from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/explaining_umis.png';
import bioconda_download from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/bioconda_download.png';
import big_deal from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/big_deal.jpg';
import fastquorum_diagram from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/fastquorum_diagram.png';
import fulcrumgenomics_logo from '@assets/images/blog/fastquorum/fulcrumgenomics.svg';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';

We are thrilled to announce the first release of [`nf-core/fastquorum`][nf-core-fastquorum-link] pipeline, which implements the [fgbio Best Practices FASTQ to Consensus Pipeline][fgbio-best-practices-link] to produce consensus reads using unique molecular indexes/barcodes (UMIs).

> Developed by [Nils Homer][nilshomer-linkedin-link] at [Fulcrum Genomics][fulcrum-genomics-link], the pipeline utilizes the [`fgbio` Bioinformatics toolkit][fgbio-link] to enable producing ultra-accurate reads for low frequency variant detection.

Reviewer 2: Mightbe worth mentioning here you're talking about genomics/DNA sequencing, given we have increasingly more non-genomics people in nf-core

Reviewer 2: You sort of do this nicely at the 'fgbio: the ...' section

It serves a similar purpose to the `--use-bases-mask` in Illumina's `bcltofastq` software, but provides some additional capabilities.

The following [handful of examples from the fgbio wiki][read-structure-examples-link] a attempt to describe the recommended way to describe a sequencing run in two different ways.
Firstly as a single Read Structure for the entire run as you might use with [`picard IlluminaBasecallsToSam`][picard-illuminabasecallstosam-link], and secondly as a set of Read Structures that would map one-to-one with the physical reads after fastq-conversion and optionally adapter trimming (which will create variable length reads):

A few examples from the re shown below:

1. A simple 2x150bp paired end run with no sample or molecular indices:

-   `150T150T`
-   `[+T, +T]`

2. A 2x75bp paired end run with an 8bp I1 index read:

-   `75T8B75T`
-   `[+T, 8B, +T]`

3. A 2x150bp paired end run with an 8bp I1 index read and an inline 6bp UMI in read 1:

-   `8M142T8B150T`

> -   `[8M+T, 8B, +T]`

Reviewer 2: Should there be a 6 in here, as in the description?
